[GSoD'19] in-product text guidelines (#2949)
mattermost/docs: source/process/documentation-UItext-guidelines.rst

In-Code Text Guidelines
========================
This is the Mattermost style guide for in-code text. Use it as a reference to ensure that the text on the Mattermost user interface (UI) is consistent and clear.

> Note

Reviewer: Update to the note markdown formatting: 

```
.. note::

  Text of the note
```

       - *Other words, separated by commas:*
   * - Label after a UI element
     - |label_after.png|
     - Sentence
     - - Noun, verb, or sentence fragment
       - No punctuation
     - - *Channels grouped by type*
       - *Alphabetically*
   * - Help text
     - |help.png|
     - Sentence
     - Complete sentences, with punctuation
     - - *You can add 20 more people.*
       - *People are invited automatically to join the channel.*
   * - Title
     - |title.png|
     - Headline
     - - Sentence fragment or sentence
       - No punctuation
     - - *Notification Preferences for Channel*
       - *Contributors*

Messages
--------

In general, do not blame the user. Inform, explain, and suggest. 

Try to use the active voice, except in these cases:

- You'll end up blaming the user. For example, don't say *You entered an incorrect password*. Instead, say *The password is incorrect*.
- You're describing what just happened. For example, it's okay to say *Your incoming webhook has been set up*.
- The subject (the doer of an action) is the Mattermost application itself. For example, it's okay to say *The image was deleted* instead of *The server deleted the image*.

> Use complete sentences. If you're asking the user to do something, use imperatives. Use the past tense to inform what's already happened, the present tense to describe a current state or condition, and the future tense to state something that will definitely happen. 

Reviewer: Can we define what imperatives are to make this more clear to the reader?

Author: I added an example and a tiny parenthetical infobyte for imperatives. Works?

User Interface Text Guidelines
========================
This is the Mattermost style guide for text used in the Mattermost product. Use these guidelines to ensure the the text on the Mattermost user interface (UI) is consistent and clear.

.. note::

> These guidelines are not intended to slow down or otherwise impede contributions, which are always welcome. No contribution will be rejected due to non-conforming style, although it might be edited.

Author: I changed this to "Contributions that do not adhere to this style guide will receive edit requests; we'll merge your contribution once you edit the text to conform to these guidelines. You might also want to look at the *UX design guidelines* as well."

....

.. contents:: 
   :depth: 2

....

> 

Author: I added a *General Principles* section.

> 

Reviewer: This is great - thanks!

UI elements
------------
Use this table when writing the text for UI elements such as windows and dialog boxes.

.. list-table::
   :widths: 10 30 10 15 35
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Element
     - Image 
     - Capitalization
     - Phrasing
     - Examples     
   * - Menu
     - |menu.png|
     - Headline
     - - Noun, noun phrase, or verb
       - No punctuation
       - Not more than three words
     - - *Members*
       - *Account Preferences*
       - *Log Out*
   * - Tooltip
     - |tooltip.png|
     - Sentence
     - - Sentence fragment or sentence
       - No punctuation
       - Include articles (*a*, *an*, *the*)
     - - *Start a Zoom meeting*
       - *Flag for following up*
       - *Remove from this list*
   * - In-field text
     - |field.png|  
     - Sentence
     - - Sentence fragment, sentence, or word
       - No punctuation
       - Include articles (*a*, *an*, *the*)
     - - *Add a comment*
       - *Search*
   * - Action button
     - |action.png|
     - Headline
     - - Verb or verb phrase
       - No articles (*a*, *an*, *the*)
       - Exceptions: *OK*, *Yes*, *No*
     - - *Add Comment*
       - *Edit*

>    * - Label before a UI element

Author: I don't think we need to establish that hierarchy. For example, the Account Settings option is a modal window with its own left-navigation (which will follow the Menu guidelines), and each of the options (Notifications, e.g.) is a menu item. The options within these menu items (e.g. Desktop notifications, Email notification, etc.) are also menu items according to me (because they have an edit option). What do you think?
Or, did I understand the comment wrong?

>    * - Label before a UI element

Author: Ignore my prev. reply, please. Eric added a screenshot to illustrate this, and i commented there...

     - |label_before.png|
     - Sentence
     - - Noun, verb, or sentence fragment
       - End with a colon
       - Include articles (*a*, *an*, *the*)
     - - *Sign in with:*
       - *Other words, separated by commas:*
   * - Label after a UI element
     - |label_after.png|
     - Sentence
     - - Noun, verb, or sentence fragment
       - No punctuation
     - - *Channels grouped by type*
       - *Alphabetically*
   * - Help text
     - |help.png|
     - Sentence
     - Complete sentences, with punctuation
     - - *You can add 20 more people.*
       - *People are invited automatically to join the channel.*
   * - Title
     - |title.png|
     - Headline
     - - Sentence fragment or sentence
       - No punctuation
     - - *Notification Preferences for Channel*
       - *Contributors*

> Messages

Author: Moved "Messages" to before the grid and made it more self-contained.

--------

> In general, do not blame the user. Inform, explain, and suggest. 

Author: Moved it to the "General Principles" section.

- Use either a complete sentence or a sentence phrase. 
- If using a complete sentence, end it with a period.
- Examples:

  - *Member added to channel*
  - *The plug-in was installed.*

Confirmations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A confirmation message is for asking somebody to confirm whether the immediately preceding command should be proceeded with. The user cannot use Mattermost until a confirmation is given or denied.

- Use complete sentences.
- Include a question that has a Yes/No answer.
- Examples:

  - *Are you sure you want to delete this channel?*
  - *A plug-in with this ID already exists. Would you like to overwrite it?*

Warnings
~~~~~~~~~

A warning message is for alerting somebody about something that might go wrong. The user can continue using Mattermost unless the warning message needs an explicit user input.

- Use complete sentences.
- Explain what has happened or can happen, and what can go wrong as a consequence.
- If the message contains a question, phrase it in such a manner so that it has a Yes/No answer (unless you have specific action buttons for the message).

- Examples:

>   - *The Enterprise licence will expire in 2 days. If you do not renew it, some features will be disabled on licence expiry.*

Author: Changed it to "...license expires..."

User Interface Text Guidelines
===============================

> This is the Mattermost style guide for text used in the Mattermost product. Use these guidelines to ensure the the text on the Mattermost user interface (UI) is consistent and clear.  These guidelines cover two types of UI text:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the Mattermost style guide for text used in the Mattermost product. Use these guidelines to ensure text on the Mattermost user interface (UI) is consistent and clear.  These guidelines cover two types of UI text:
```

Author: corrected

> - The messages that are triggered because something happened

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Messages triggered because something happened
```

Author: Corrected

> - The static text on the user interface

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Static text on the user interface
```

Author: Corrected

.. note::

Contributions that do not adhere to this style guide will receive edit requests; we'll merge your contribution once you edit the text to conform to these guidelines. You might want to look at the `UX design guidelines`_ as well.

....

.. contents:: 
   :depth: 2

....

General principles for in-product text
---------------------------------------

- Keep in mind that your users are from all over the world. Use words that are clear and easy to understand.

> - Don't blame the user. Inform them about what happened, explain why it happened, and suggest a way forward.

Reviewer 3: This seems like it should live under the error messages section?

Author: Moved it to the messages section.

> - Try to be concise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Be concise.
```

Author: :) Corrected.

> - Try to use the active voice, except in these cases:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Use the active voice, except for these cases:
```

Author: Corrected

   - If you'll end up blaming the user. For example, don't say *You entered an incorrect password*. Instead, say *The password is incorrect*.
   - If you're describing what just happened. For example, it's okay to say *Your incoming webhook has been set up*.
   - If the subject (the doer of an action) is the Mattermost application itself. For example, it's okay to say *The image was deleted* instead of *The server deleted the image*.

> - Use the past tense to say what's already happened, the present tense to describe a current state or condition, and the future tense to state something that is very definitely going to happen.

Reviewer 3: 0/5 and I'll let other PMs chime in but we have been trying to avoid the past tense in most cases. ie "The image was deleted" or "Your incoming webhook has been set up" can potentially be cleaned up by saying "The image is deleted" or "Your incoming webhook is set up" and still be accurate.

Reviewer 2: +1 for using the present tense - it'll keep the text simpler and more direct. It is also consistent with point 7 of [blog content guidelines](https://docs.mattermost.com/process/marketing-guidelines.html#guidelines-12-tips-for-sparkling-content) which recommends using the active voice

Author: Changed to the present tense.

Reviewer 3: Thanks. In that case does this phrase still apply? 

> Use the past tense to say what's already happened

Author: It doesn't. I debated with myself on whether to leave it in because there *might* be rare instances when the past tense is applicable ("The server crashed"). Am removing it now.

- If you're asking the user to do or not do something, use imperatives (command phrases). For example, say *Do not change the Hostname* instead of saying *It is not recommended to change the Hostname*. Better still, explain what could go wrong if they do or don't do something. For example, say *Do not change the Hostname because if you do so <this bad thing will happen>.*

Guidelines for messages
------------------------

Try to use complete sentences in your messages. If a message contains variables (tokens):

- Do not use verbs or adjectives as variables.
- Do not create plurals of variables by adding an *s*.
- If the variable is a noun, use a qualifier after the variable. For example, say *The {channel_name} channel was created* instead of saying *The {channel_name} was created*.

Messages can be of the following types: notification, confirmation, warning, and error. The following sections contain guidelines that are specific to each of these types.

Notification messages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A notification message is for informing somebody about something that happened. Such messages do not need any user input, and do not prevent a user from continuing to use Mattermost.

> - Use either a complete sentence or a sentence phrase. 

Reviewer 3: Which is preferable? Or should we pick one and stick with it? If both are needed then in what cases is a complete vs phrase used?

Author: This is a tricky one. The style guides I've seen don't indicate a preference. Personally, I tend towards conciseness so if I write a message, it would probably be a phrase. However, good practices for internationalization suggest that complete sentences. For example, "User deleted from team" is as clear as "The user was deleted from the team" in English. But when translated, the phrase could likely end up as a complete sentence in another language.

Reviewer 3: I agree I would also lean toward conciseness while being clear. So maybe we just add that to the guidelines.

Author: I added this to the general guidelines for messages: "Try to use complete sentences in your messages. A sentence phrase (an incomplete sentence) might sound okay in English but could present internationalization challenges."

- If using a complete sentence, end it with a period.
- Examples:

  - *Member added to channel*
  - *The plug-in was installed.*

Confirmation messages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A confirmation message is for asking somebody to confirm whether the immediately preceding command should be proceeded with. The user cannot use Mattermost until a confirmation is given or denied.

- Use complete sentences.
- Include a question that has a Yes/No answer.
- Examples:

  - *Are you sure you want to delete this channel?*
  - *A plug-in with this ID already exists. Would you like to overwrite it?*

Warning messages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A warning message is for alerting somebody about something that might go wrong. The user can continue using Mattermost unless the warning message needs an explicit user input.

- Use complete sentences.
- Explain what has happened or can happen, and what can go wrong as a consequence.

> - If the message contains a question, phrase it in such a manner so that it has a Yes/No answer (unless you have specific action buttons for the message).

Reviewer 3: Should the message contain a question if the user doesn't have to take action (since it's a warning)?

Author: I don't think so.

Reviewer 3: In that case should we update the phrase

> If the message contains a question, phrase it in such a manner so that it has a Yes/No answer

Seems that warnings should not contain a question, since there are no actions

Author: *facepalm* yes! forgot to update. Corrected.

- Examples:

  - *The Enterprise license expires in 2 days. If you do not renew it, some features will be disabled on licence expiry.*

>   - *If you claim this AD/LDAP account, you will no longer be able to log in with your email. Do you want to continue?*

Reviewer 3: This case would be a confirmation message in my mind.

Author: I deleted the second sentence to make it sound like a warning.

Error messages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

An error message is for telling somebody that something went wrong. Errors prevent a user from doing a task or accessing a feature till the error is resolved.

- Use complete sentences.
- If what went wrong isn't obvious, explain in one sentence.
- If a solution or workaround isn't obvious, suggest one.
- Examples:

>   - *This message is too long. Shorten it to 120 characters.*

Reviewer 3: Should it be "Shorten it to 120 characters" or "Messages must be less than 120 characters"? The solution is obvious in this case, so which takes precedence - "what went wrong" vs "suggesting a solution"?

"Shorten it to 120 characters" in my mind feels like a harsh command

Author: Another tricky one. Case-to-case basis?

  - *The passwords do not match.*

Guidelines for UI elements
---------------------------
Use this table when writing the text for UI elements such as windows, dialog boxes, labels, and prompts.

.. list-table::
   :widths: 10 30 10 15 35
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Element
     - Image 
     - Capitalization
     - Phrasing
     - Examples     
   * - Menu
     - |menu.png|

>      - All words

Reviewer 3: Are there exceptions? What about words like "as", "of"? For example, "Mark as Unread"?

Author: Yes, there are exceptions. Words with 3 letters or fewer, articles, prepositions, and coordinating conjunctions will not be capitalized if for headline style of capitalization. However, since the audience of this style guide would be developers mainly (who might not know about headline style vs. sentence style), I thought I'll simplify it to "All words". Do you think we should change it to "Headline style"?
Since "as" is a subordinating conjunction, it will be capitalzed  :) "Mark As Unread". Nouns, pronouns, adjectives, adverbs, verbs, and subordinating conjunctions are.

Reviewer 3: Yes I think we should make the guidelines as accurate as possible, maybe provide a link to a website or other resource that explains what Headline style is?

Author: I added a footnote to the table.

     - - Noun, noun phrase, or verb
       - No punctuation
       - Not more than three words

>      - - *Members*

Reviewer 3: Members is not very obvious what action can be taken. Should there be a note about making the text obvious enough to understand what action can be taken without having to click to discover?

Author: For menus, oftentimes one-word commands are okay because there'll be a click trail that the user's gone through to arrive at this menu. But adding a note to the guidance is a good idea.

Reviewer 3: ^ +1

Author: Added "Action after clicking is obvious, without needing someone to click to discover"

       - *Account Preferences*
       - *Log Out*

>    * - Tooltip

Reviewer 3: Any length guidelines for tooltips?

Author: I was unsure about laying down a length guideline. Do you think we can leave it to the developer's judgment? The guidance from the [NN group](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/tooltip-guidelines/) doesn't specify a length...

Reviewer 3: In that case should we add a line about preference for conciseness?

Author: Added "Keep it short".

>      - |tooltip.png|

Reviewer 3: We'll have to update the pic here after the text changes are made

Author: I changed the pic. It's now 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/12574108/68640520-0fcdc700-052e-11ea-9ec6-2211f8c8d7e6.png)

     - First word
     - - Sentence fragment or sentence
       - No punctuation
       - Include articles (*a*, *an*, *the*)
     - - *Start a Zoom meeting*
       - *Flag for following up*
       - *Remove from this list*

>    * - In-field text

Reviewer 3: What should be included here? For example, should in-field text be an example of an entry, a description of the field, the title of the field etc? ie for an email box it could be

- johndoe@example.com
- "Email"
- "Enter an email" 
- etc

Author: Thing is, good accessibility practices say that we shouldn't have in-field text; rather, the text should be outside of the text box. So, I am a bit ambivalent towards having too much guidance around in-field text. But if we need that text, I would prefer to have an example of an entry (johndoe@example.com). The title of the field should, ideally, have been a label, and the dsecription of the field should, ideally, be help text.

Reviewer 3: Agree with the example proposal, let's add that as the preference if we're in agreement

Author: Updated to "Sentence fragment, sentence, or word that's an example of a valid entry".
Also updated the Label guidance to say "Noun, verb, or sentence fragment that's the title of the UI element"

     - |field.png|  
     - First word
     - - Sentence fragment, sentence, or word
       - No punctuation
       - Include articles (*a*, *an*, *the*)
     - - *Add a comment*
       - *Search*

>    * - Action button

Reviewer 3: We should probably have maxlength guidelines for action buttons

Author: One of the good principles of internationalization is that we should leave enough space on the buttons to accommodate expansion of text after translations, so if we say "3 words", do you think that would take care of i18n? Or, should the number of characters be specified?

Reviewer 3: Three words is probably sufficient. We can adjust later if we can't make that work

Author: Added "No longer than 3 words"

     - |action.png|
     - All words
     - - Verb or verb phrase
       - No articles (*a*, *an*, *the*)
       - Exceptions: *OK*, *Yes*, *No*
     - - *Add Comment*
       - *Edit*
   * - Label before a UI element
     - |label_before.png|
     - First word
     - - Noun, verb, or sentence fragment

>        - End with a colon

Reviewer 3: Is a colon applicable in all of the cases of this category you found in the spreadsheet?

Author: No, a colon is applicable only if it precedes another UI element such as a radio button or a check box.

Reviewer 3: Okay, can we make sure the guidelines state that specifically. I'd like to try and get the guidelines to cover as many cases as possible so there is no (or as limited as possible) ambiguity for someone reading these for the first time with no context. That applies to all sections if there are cases we should call out specifically

Author: Added "End with a colon if it precedes another UI element such as a radio button or check box"

       - Include articles (*a*, *an*, *the*)
     - - *Sign in with:*
       - *Other words, separated by commas:*
   * - Label after a UI element

>      - |label_after.png|

Reviewer 3: Notes for this category:

1. We need to find consistency in the product. For example, do we refer to things as "Off" or "Never"
2. How much description is used for these. ie do we rely more on help text to keep the radio buttons easier to read
3. Max length guidelines required?

Author: 1. We could probably have a word-usage list to lay down which words should be used (or not) when.
2. My preference would be radio buttons because...self-contained.
3. Not sure. Keep it open, and edit the edge cases (if any) during PR review?

Reviewer 3: 1. Agree, and ideally update the guidelines or link to that for reference if applicable 0/5
2. We can iterate, but one thing to keep in mind is if radio button text gets long it can be overwhelming for a user to read everything and change settings vs trying to make the radio buttons as concise as possible and explain only what's needed to fill in the gaps in help text.
3. That's fine, again I would propose a preference of conciseness

Author: Added "Brief (move lengthier explanations belong to help text)"

For word-usage list, okay if I add links to the [MSTP list](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/welcome/) (we need to click on the A-Z word collection link on the ToC at the left; doesn't have a direct URL) in the general guidelines section?

     - First word
     - - Noun, verb, or sentence fragment
       - No punctuation
     - - *Channels grouped by type*
       - *Alphabetically*
   * - Help text
     - |help.png|
     - First word
     - Complete sentences, with punctuation
     - - *You can add 20 more people.*
       - *People are invited automatically to join the channel.*

>    * - Title

Reviewer 3: Same general note as above, How much description is used for these, or do we rely on the nested buttons and subsequent help text to do more describing in hierarchical order. We just need to got to consistency

For example:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/14333569/67972195-6e5c8200-fbcb-11e9-815d-3a2ef337a3a1.png)

Author: For better UX, I would've suggested moving the help text to _before_ the radio buttons. Are nested components re-used (used at more than one place on the interface)? If they are, we should probably keep the help text outside of the nesting, so that the buttons can make sense on their own?

Reviewer 3: I think typical settings UX has buttons before help text, do you have examples of them the other way around? 

Settings are the only place that uses this nesting UI (Account, Team and Channel settings modals)

Author: Yes, typical UX does have buttons before help text but in those cases, generally, the help text is placed closest to the button it belongs to. Like this:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/12574108/68733916-55f25b80-05fe-11ea-815d-96e2f1dbecc0.png)

I cannot remember seeing a nested UI like the Settings example, but here, I'd think the hierarchy itself provides sufficient context to a user, I would think. Only, as a user, I would've preferred the nested UI to be something more like this:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/12574108/68734308-f1d09700-05ff-11ea-9cd0-26c0dd7baa78.png)

What do you think?

     - |title.png|
     - All words
     - - Sentence fragment or sentence
       - No punctuation
     - - *Notification Preferences for Channel*
       - *Contributors*
   
Cheatsheet: UI text
-----------------------
|cheatsheet.png|

.. |menu.png| image:: ./images/menu.png
  :alt: menu
.. |tooltip.png| image:: ./images/tooltip.png
  :alt: tooltip
.. |field.png| image:: ./images/field.png
  :alt: in-field text
.. |action.png| image:: ./images/action.png
  :alt: action button
.. |label_before.png| image:: ./images/label_before.png
  :alt: labels before a UI element
.. |label_after.png| image:: ./images/label_after.png
  :alt: labels after a UI element
.. |help.png| image:: ./images/help.png
  :alt: help text
.. |title.png| image:: ./images/title.png
  :alt: title
.. |cheatsheet.png| image:: ./images/cheatsheet.png

>   :alt: cheatsheet for punctuation and capitalization

Reviewer 2: minor - the tooltip textbox has a typo in the screenshot: `puntuation` --> `punctuation` . Since it's a screenshot, it may not be easy to resolve so I wouldn't worry if not easy to fix.

Author: I created the image in Excel, so it's still editable easily. Fixed.

User Interface Text Guidelines
===============================

> This is the Mattermost style guide for text used in the Mattermost product. Use these guidelines to ensure the text on the Mattermost user interface (UI) is consistent and clear.  These guidelines cover two types of UI text:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is the Mattermost style guide for text used in the Mattermost product. Use these guidelines to ensure text on the Mattermost user interface (UI) is consistent and clear.  These guidelines cover two types of UI text:
```

Author: Thank you @jasonblais. I made this change.

Guidelines for messages
------------------------

Don't blame the user. Inform them about what happened, explain why it happened, and suggest a way forward.

Try to use complete sentences in your messages. A sentence phrase (an incomplete sentence) might sound okay in English but could present internationalization challenges.

If a message contains variables (tokens):

- Do not use verbs or adjectives as variables.
- Do not create plurals of variables by adding an *s*.
- If the variable is a noun, use a qualifier after the variable. For example, say *The {channel_name} channel was created* instead of saying *The {channel_name} was created*.

Messages can be of the following types: notification, confirmation, warning, and error. The following sections contain guidelines that are specific to each of these types.

Notification messages
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A notification message is for informing somebody about something that happened. Such messages do not need any user input, and do not prevent a user from continuing to use Mattermost.

- Use either a complete sentence or a sentence phrase. 
- If using a complete sentence, end it with a period.
- Examples:

>   - *Member added to channel*

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - *Member added to channel.*
```
